I love this phrase, done means done.
When I ask a developer if they are done, they usually say yes.
Then I ask, are they done done?
And they say, well, not really.
Why is that?
Let's explore.
So, what does done mean in the Kanban world? The work in progress is
done only when the done rule is satisfied. More on the done rule in a
moment. A card is only moved from left to right when it satisfies the
definition of done for that step.
The definition of done is, well, the done rule.
The done rule is also known as the "pull" criteria.
That is,
is it okay to pull the work forward into my step and begin working on it?
Remember, in the previous section,
we expanded our columns to have a work in progress
and done column within each step.
This is the real reason why we have those two columns per step,
so it makes it absolutely clear what is work in progress versus what is done.
Now let's see some examples.
Let's look at examples for each of our workflow steps; specify,
implement, and validate. Our specify done rule is a work in progress
backlong item is decomposed into tasks that can be finished in less than
five work days and specifications are completed.
Our implement done rule is code is developed and unit tested, the specs are
updated as necessary, the code is checked into the repository, and a clean
build is created. Our validate done rule is the code is independently tested,
behavior is compliant with the specs, the pilot customers reviewed it, and all
bugs found have been corrected.
This approach instills discipline in the process and better ensures quality.
The done rules are what the team decides,
and again, they can be changed and improved at any time. Now there is no
ambiguity on if you are done or done done, as I mentioned earlier in this
section. The criteria for done is clearly documented and understood by
all. Who works on the next card? Well, it's really pretty easy.
It is assigned to whoever is free in the next step to pull the card forward.
And of course,
they need to be capable to do the work and have all the basic
skills, but even if they are green, or new at times,
you must give them a chance, of course. And lastly,
you may assign it to anyone,
even in different steps, if they are free to work on the card.
But there's some qualifications for that.
For example,
if there is someone free in the validate step and is
capable of developing code as well, then they will pull the ticket,
and now they'll be working on that ticket in the implement step.
So we have reduced capacity in the validate step by one and
added capacity in the implement step by one,
and you and your team can decide on how long the new work
in progress limits will remain changed.
This is all figured out and determined in the daily standups.
The total work in progress limits have not changed.
You just happen to move them from one step to another. Total
work in progress limits can change, of course,
if you add resources or subtract resources overall.
Demand and capacity allocation.
Now that we have a good understanding of work in
progress and how we limit it for each step,
how do you think it was set up in the first place? By determining
the demand you think you have for each step.
For example, early in a project,
you will have a lot of specified work, so you may
allocate more resources there. Now there'll be more
capacity in that step. Based on demand,
allocate or reallocate as needed your capacity. As workflow
fluctuates, modify your capacity up or down per step.
Move your capacity; you know, your people resources, to different steps.
Yes, I know,
easier said than done, as the phrase goes. You may have the best QA
person doing great work on the validate step,
but you still can't move her to the implement step very
easily; no development skills, say, for example. So this is just not that easy.
So the takeaway here is that you can adjust your work in progress
limits and add or remove resources as you need to,
and if it makes sense to do so.
For me, cross training is essential.
The more the cross training your team has, the more flexibility you will have to move resources.